---
layout: post
title:  "Time-Stepping Schemes"
date:   2020-02-13 11:10:11 -0500
categories: Mathematics
---
A brief overview of how to solve ODEs using discrete computation

# Time-Stepping Schemes

Many mathematical models of time-dependent phenomena $y(t)$ provide only the time **rate-of-change** (derivative) $y'(t)$, with no closed form for $y(t)$ given. The standard form of a 1st order ODE:

$$y'(t) = f(t, y(t))$$ with $$y(t_0) = y_0$$.



**Time-stepping** schemes provide a **discrete, numerical** way of solving these problems.

The numerical solution given by a time-stepping scheme is a set of **discrete** set of time/value pairs, $(t_i,y_i)$.

Hence, we are "steps" through time as we iteratively create numerical approximations at specific intervals along the true value of the function.



### General Form of a Time-Stepping Scheme

Using the **initial conditions** provided by the derivative:

Set $n=0,t=t_0,y=y_0$.

1. Compute $y_{n+1}$
2. Increment time, $t_{n+1} = t_n + h$
3. Advance $n = n+1$
4. Iterate.

There are many different time-stepping schemes that exist. These are the categories:

- Single-step vs Multistep: Do we use information from the current $t_i$, or from previous $t_i$ as well?
- Explicit vs implicit: Do we need to solve an implicit equation to evaluate $y_{n+1}$?
- Timestep size: Does $h$ vary?

## Forward Euler

*Forward Euler* is an explicit, single-step scheme of the following form:

1. Compute the current slope: $y'_n = f(t_n,y_n)$
2. Step in a straight line with that slope: $y_{n+1} = y_n + h * y'_n$
3. Iterate

Note that steps 1 and 2 are really just one step - we can substitute $f(t_n,y_n)$ for $y'_n$ in step 2.

We may view time-stepping as a **recurrence relation** that approximates function values at later and later times ($y_0 -> y_1 -> y_2$. etc).

### Some Notation

- $y(t_n)$ is the *exact* value of the true function $y$ at time $t_n$
- $y_n$ is the discrete value at time $t_n$.

### Time Integration

Time-stepping is actually the process of integrating over time to approximate $y$ from $y'$ with huge steps.

### Systems of Differentials

In a system of differentials, apply **Forward Euler** to each row. Creates a vector recurrence.

